John the Ripper – Basic Documentation (My Learning Notes)

This documentation is a summary of what I studied and practiced while learning John the Ripper (JtR) for one week. I tried to write this in a simple way so that anybody can understand it easily. Some parts may have small grammar mistakes because I wrote it like how I actually speak.


---

1. Introduction to John the Ripper

John the Ripper (JtR) is an open-source password-cracking tool used by security researchers, penetration testers, and ethical hackers. It supports many different hash types from Linux, Windows, compressed files, documents, SSH keys, and more.

My learning mainly focused on setting it up, identifying hashes, cracking different file types, and understanding how password storage works.


---

2. Setting Up the System

I used Kali Linux and sometimes a normal Linux machine. Installing John is simple:

sudo apt update
sudo apt install john -y

I also installed hash-identifier tools and downloaded a Python script (hash.py) from GitHub to detect unknown hash types.


---

3. Identifying Hashes (hash.py)

One of the most important steps before cracking is to understand what hash type you're dealing with.

I downloaded a hash.py tool from GitHub which prints possible hash formats based on the hash pattern.

python3 hash.py <hash>

It identifies hash formats like:

MD5

SHA-256

bcrypt

LM/NT hashes

Zip file hashes


This helped me understand how different hashes look.


---

4. How Passwords Are Stored (Linux vs Windows)

During my learning, I studied where passwords are stored inside both OS.

Linux Password Storage

Linux stores user credentials in:

/etc/passwd → contains username + ID info (no passwords)

/etc/shadow → contains actual hashed passwords


Example Linux hash format:

$6$123abcf$longhashvalue...

$6$ means SHA-512.

To crack a Linux shadow file:

unshadow /etc/passwd /etc/shadow > combined.txt
john combined.txt

Windows Password Storage

Windows stores passwords inside the SAM file. The most common hash types:

LM Hash (old)

NT Hash (NTLM)


After extracting using tools like samdump2:

john --format=nt hashes.txt

This gave me a clear difference between both systems.


---

5. Basic Cracking Modes in John

I practiced three main modes:

a) Single Crack Mode

This uses the username and other metadata to guess passwords.

john --single hashes.txt

b) Wordlist Mode

Using a custom wordlist:

john --wordlist=mylist.txt hashes.txt

c) Incremental Mode

Brute force mode.

john --incremental hashes.txt


---

6. Custom Rules

I also studied how to create custom rules for modifying wordlists.

Example from my test (simple rule):

[List.Rules:MyRules]
Az"123"

This rule takes a word and adds 123 at the end.

Run it:

john --wordlist=mylist.txt --rules=MyRules hashes.txt

I experimented with multiple rules to generate more realistic password patterns.


---

7. Cracking ZIP File Passwords

To crack zip files:

Extract hash:

zip2john myfile.zip > zip_hash.txt

Then crack:

john zip_hash.txt

This was one of the easiest modes and helped me understand file-based hash cracking.


---

8. Cracking Raw Hashes

I learned about the --format=raw-xxx options.

Example:

john --format=raw-md5 hash.txt

This helped when hash.py told me the hash type.


---

9. Cracking SSH Private Keys

I practiced cracking encrypted SSH private keys.

First convert to hash:

ssh2john id_rsa > ssh_hash.txt

Then run John:

john ssh_hash.txt

This was a little slow but really cool to learn.


---

10. Summary of My Learning Journey

Over one week, I learned:

How to install and set up John

How to identify hashes

Difference between Linux and Windows password storage

How to crack Linux shadow files

How to crack Windows NT hashes

Single mode, wordlist mode, incremental mode

How custom rules work

Cracking ZIP file passwords

Cracking raw hashes

Cracking SSH private keys


Mostly I used AI help instead of watching any tutorials, so each topic took time, but I understood it deeply.


---

11. Final Notes

This document is not professional-level documentation. This is more like a personal learning file. I wrote it the way I understood the concepts. Anyone reading this should use this only for educational and ethical hacking purposes.


---

End of Document
